Title: Gaining Ten Extra Hours a Week
Date: 2016-02-01
Author: Shaun Finglas
Tags: retro
Slug: 2016/02/gaining-ten-extra-hours-week

For a long time my work life balance has gone through phases. Some weeks
I would spend hours after work writing code. This would exceed to well
beyond midnight in some cases. This phase was not sustainable but it
appeared to be the norm.

My other hobbies such as reading and gaming were also neglected. These
too suffered from weeks of focus, followed by quieter periods.

Over the course of a typical year this cycle would generally balance
out, but never feel comfortable. There were always areas that lacked
focus. One of my common complaints which I have shared with many other
developers is around the lack of time to do anything additional to the
day to day job. There always seemed to be a sacrifice.

#### Mornings

The book [Soft
Skills](http://www.amazon.co.uk/Soft-Skills-software-developers-manual/dp/1617292397)
recommends taking the first hour or two out of your weekly day to focus
on important goals. This piece of advice was not going to work for me I
thought. I was not a morning person.

Sometime after I discovered an article from the [Art Of Manliness
(AoM)](http://www.artofmanliness.com/2010/09/07/never-let-the-sun-catch-you-sleeping-why-and-how-to-become-an-early-riser/)
which gave tips on becoming a early riser.

#### How To

Instead of simply waking up a whole two hours earlier than usual, AoM
offered an incremental solution. Set your alarm ten minutes earlier and
live with it for a whole week. Each week reduce by a further ten minutes
until you hit your target.

This process took about three weeks to see any real benefit. While this
can be considered slow progress the act of doing so was incredibly easy.
Incrementally reducing the time also provides time for your body to
adjust, meaning it's a lot easier to stick with.

#### Downsides

The obvious downside here is that the two additional hours you gain in
the morning are removed from the end of the day. In other words you'll
find yourself going to sleep earlier. Having a good balance between
work, hobbies and free time means this trade off is well worth the
change.

One area this technique cannot much provide benefit is with children.
Developers with children would find it difficult to use an uninterrupted
block first thing in the morning. Not being a parent myself means I
cannot provide any alternatives.

#### Benefits

Like most things in life, small changes add up to big things over a long
period. Thanks to this change I nearly doubled the amount of blog posts
I wrote back in 2015 when compared to 2014. I've read more books and
watched more technical videos during this period than ever, while still
maintaining a healthy balance in other areas of my life. Give it a go,
become a morning person.