Title: Tasking in Software Development
Date: 2015-05-01
Author: Shaun Finglas
Tags: retro, team
Slug: 2015/05/tasking-in-software-development

Tasking is core part of XP, Kanban, Scrum and other software development
methodologies. It is required when more than one developer is working on
a feature. I consider it to be the most wasteful part of the development
process as practiced in the mainstream.

Tasking typically involves the team sitting around a
machine/desk/whiteboard/projector. From past experience this can take
anywhere from an hour up to a day or more. Engagement is often low and
this process can be both mentally and physically tiring. During which
many assumptions about what should be done is made.

The end result is nothing but index cards, scribbled diagrams or other
lightweight documentation. These artifacts are often transformed into
digital versions.

#### Problems

The foolish understanding is that now any developer can pick up a task
and start work. This leads to dependent tasks being worked on in an
independent manner. Team members then find themselves being impeded
until a certain piece of code is in place. No amount of swarming or pair
programming can help in most cases.

The biggest failure that poor tasking encourages is a task board with
numerous items moved to complete, [yet the actual functionality is
broken and stood no chance of
working](http://ronjeffries.com/articles/2015-01-02-hours-estimation/).
In my past experience, this is unfortunately very common.

An equally common scenario is when task cards are stationary for long
periods, until they all move across to "done" very suddenly. This is
usually a symptom of a unidentified problem or change coming into play.

Ultimately poor tasking results in waste.

#### Solutions

Due to the frustrations of experiencing these problems week after week,
across numerous teams, I have experimented with a variety of solutions.

Possibly the most controversial and difficult to sell is to have small
enough stories and features that mean a single developer/pair can work
on. Tasking becomes organic, just part of the day to day work. A simple
check list of tasks can suffice here. Both team members stay in sync
because the overhead of other team members has been removed. Ultimately
you still need to integrate these small(er) features but there are ways
to slimline this.

A less dramatic solution is to task in a ad-hoc basis, per story/feature
and limit WIP to include tasking. In other words, if you are aiming to
deliver three features over several weeks, task the first feature and
move onto coding. If during this coding phase you change plans or
discover a problem, limited work is lost. Additionally tasking in
smaller chunks is better for the teams' morale.

The two other solutions are the most powerful at combating the tasking
problem I have described, these are to utilize a [Walking
Skeleton](https://blog.shaunfinglas.co.uk/2015/05/walking-skeleton.html)
and try [Mob
Programming](https://blog.shaunfinglas.co.uk/2015/05/mob-programming.html).
Both of which will be detailed in future posts.