Title: Why Technical Blogging?
Date: 2015-01-01
Author: Shaun Finglas
Tags: blogging, retro
Slug: 2015/01/why-technical-blogging

Given this is my fifth year of blogging I figured it would be worth
while answering "*Why bother with technical blogging?*".

#### Get Writing

Write about anything. Just get started, providing it fits your core
focus. This blog focuses on programming and software development related
topics, so anything that falls within this category is fair game. Take a
single idea and from this one blog post you can generate many more
ideas. This is where my [upcoming
list](http://blog.shaunfinglas.co.uk/p/upcoming.html) comes from. A
single post can spawn many others and the process will repeat itself.

Honest posts, that focus on your experiences tend to be the most well
received. Quality over quantity also factors. I try to focus posts,
rather than going for length or in depth topics. My early posts are very
rough around the edges, they will continue to improve as time goes by.
Ultimately the more you blog, the better you'll become at it.

#### Schedule

Finding the time to create posts is quite difficult. Making and sticking
to a schedule can help immensely though. Since adopting a weekly
schedule, this has lead to a steady stream of posts. In turn these posts
lead to a steady stream of views. Being completely honest, getting
started was hard. Following a schedule and using the advice in this post
can help though. Initially you may spend a long time working on content,
but overtime this will reduce.

#### Views

The best advice is to ignore view counts. High view counts make you feel
great, but there is much more to writing content than simply generating
stats. Your highest viewed posts may very well surprise you, likewise
content you feel should be seen by everyone can struggle. Rather than
views, interactions are much more rewarding. Any content that gets a
retweet, reply or email is much more satisfying.

#### People

In the area of technical blogging the majority of interactions are good
natured. People are overwhelmingly nice in most cases. Twitter tends to
yield positive comments or retweets partly due to the use of real names
in most cases. Article submission sites can be a mixed bag, but for any
negativity the view count to comment ratio will balance out. A lot of
interesting followers are discovered thanks to this blog.

#### Benefit Yourself

Regular posts allows you to practice writing, which is a surprisingly
enjoyable activity when you enjoy the content.

I learn a lot from doing, but I also find writing down what I have
learned or discovered is incredibly valuable. Having an archive of
content that I find important is a huge help. If you've learned
something new? Blog about it. If you've talked about something relevant?
Blog about it. This helps with the generation of new content.

Having an archive of posts is great for reflection. Looking back over
old posts and confirming whether or not I still agree helps with
learning. Have I discovered anything new since? Just the act of
re-reading and refreshing myself with a concept can be useful. This
tactic combined with a [developer
diary](http://blog.shaunfinglas.co.uk/2014/09/developer-diaries.html)
has proved a powerful combination.

#### Career Benefits

Additionally to personal benefits, regularly blogging has had a big
impact on my career. It has helped me during job interviews as it helps
provide evidence for my claims. Most surprisingly eighteen months ago I
was offered the chance to help write a book. Unfortunately due to a new
house and job I was forced to decline the offer at the time, however
without technical blogging and other writing there is no chance I would
have had this opportunity.

Within the last couple of weeks I have received contacts from numerous
recruiters. As part of these there was a personalised email, which not
only detailed my blog but clearly saw other online contributions. This
recruiter went above and beyond the norm. While I never worked with
them, this polite and encouraging email is yet another benefit of
technical blogging.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The book [Techinical
Blogging](https://pragprog.com/book/actb/technical-blogging) by
[@acangiano](https://twitter.com/acangiano) is a great starting place
for more information and advice.